
DISORDERED PROTEINS




COMPOSICION DE AAs y PROPIEDADES FISICOQUIMICAS(tipicamente alta carga neta y baja hidrofobicidad):

Disordered regions can be highly conserved between species in both composition and sequence and

Some of the ID proteins have been discovered due their unusual amino acid sequence compositions and the absence of regular structure in these proteins has been explained by the specific features of their amino acid sequences including the presence of numerous uncompensated charged groups (often negative); i.e., a high net charge at neutral pH, arising from the extreme pI values in such proteins , and a low content of hydrophobic amino acid residues.
It has been concluded that the combination of low mean hydrophobicity and relatively high net charge represents an important prerequisite for the absence of compact structure in proteins under physiological conditions. This observation was used to develop a charge-hydropathy (CH) plot method of analysis that distinguishes ordered and disordered proteins based only on their net charges and hydropathies.
From the physical viewpoint, such a combination of low hydrophobicity with high net charge as a prerequisite for intrinsic unfoldedness makes perfect sense: high net charge leads to charge-
charge repulsion, and low hydrophobicity means less driving force for protein compaction. In other words, these features are characteristic for ID proteins with the coil-like (or close to coil-
like) structures.
The disordered proteins are significantly depleted in bulky hydrophobic (Ile, Leu, and Val) and aromatic amino acid residues (Trp, Tyr, and Phe), which would normally form the hydrophobic core of a folded globular protein, and also possess low content of Cys and Asn residues.
The depletion of ID protein in Cys is also crucial as this amino acid residue is known to have a significant contribution to the protein conformation stability via the disulfide bond formation or being involved in coordination of different prosthetic groups.
On the other hand, ID proteins were shown to be substantially enriched in polar, disorder-promoting, amino acids: Ala, Arg, Gly, Gln, Ser, Glu, and Lys and also in the hydrophobic, but structure braking Pro.

In addition to amino-acid composition, the disordered segments have also been compared with the ordered ones by various attributes such as hydropathy, net charge, flexibility index, helix
propensities, strand propensities, and compositions for groups of amino acids such as W + Y + F (aromaticity).
Thus, the ID proteins differ dramatically from the ordered proteins in their amino acid sequences. These differences were used to develop different predictors of intrinsic disorder.
********* LOS PRIMEROS PREDICTORES DE DESORDEN NACEN DE ANALISIS DE LA COMPOSICION Y DE CIERTAS PROPIEDADES FISICOQUIMICAS DE LA SECUENCIAS

The fact that natively unfolded proteins, with their depleted hydrophobicity, are noncompact under physiological conditions indicates that ‘salted water’ (typical ‘physiological’ buffer contains 100–150 mM NaCl) does not represent for them a poor solvent.
In other words, these
conditions do not force polymer segments to interact
specifically with each other and, thus, do not force them
to be effectively excluded from the solvent. On the other
hand, it has already been noted that even high concentra-
tions of strong denaturants do not represent a good sol-
vent for a polypeptide chain encoding for a typical glob-
ular protein, and a globular protein was assumed to never
be a random coil.





CONFORMACIONES ADOPTADAS EN SOLUCION:



En la introduccion a los diferentes estados conformacionales de las proteinas en general, dije que el estado nativo podia estar compuesto por una conformacion random coil. En esa descripcion, se llego a una conclusion that globular proteins are never random coils(es decir, nunca estan en una conformacion totalmente desplegada o random). Accumulated data nonambiguously show that they most likely represent the polymer coils below a critical point, even under harsh denaturing conditions.
Pero acá estamos hablando de un numero considerable de proteinas cuya secuencia encodes for the intrinsically unstructured proteins without specific structure.
These raise several compelling biophysical questions related to the structural characteristics of natively unfolded proteins. How unfolded are these proteins? Are they random coils, or do
they possess residual structure? If they have residual structure, how should they be classified?
Based on the analysis of the available literature, it has
been concluded that intrinsically unstructured proteins do
not possess uniform structural properties, as expected for
members of a single thermodynamic entity. In fact, they
may be divided into two structurally different groups, in-
trinsic coils and premolten globules.
Proteins from the
first group have hydrodynamic dimensions typical of
considerably unfolded polypeptide chain in poor solvent
(see below and fig. 1), and do not possess any (or almost any) ordered secondary structure. Proteins from the sec-
ond group are more compact (see below and fig. 1), and
exhibit some amount of residual secondary structure.
However, they are still less dense than native globular or
molten globule proteins

For an IDP, the energy landscape is characterized by the lack of a global minimum and by the presence of multiple local minima separated by low energy barriers. As a consequence, such a protein exists as a dynamic ensemble of interconverting structures.
Functional complexes of IDPs with their partners are formed via the specific intermolecular interactions that change the energy landscape creating more defined free energy minima.(ESTO LO PODRIA PONER EN LA PARTE DE INDUCED FIT)
A similar mechanism underlies the formation of the non-productive protein complexes (oligomers, amorphous aggregates, amyloid-like fibrils, etc.). Here, interactions of the disordered parts of IDPs or interactions of the denatured proteins result in the appearance of profound free energy minima.


Structurally, IDPs range
from completely unstructured polypeptides (native coils, that resemble the highly unfolded
states of globular proteins) to extended partially structured forms (native pre-molten
globules) or even to compact disordered ensembles that may contain significant secondary
structure (native molten globules)

ID proteins have dynamic structures that interconvert on a number of timescales and have been shown to have many similarities to non-native states of “normal” globular proteins, which may
exist in at least four different conformations: native (ordered), molten globule, pre-molten globule, and coil-like.
Using this analogy, it has been established that ID proteins and regions under physiological conditions in vitro might contain collapsed-disorder (i.e., where ID is present in a form of molten globules) and extended-disorder (i.e., regions where ID is present in a form of random coil or pre-molten globule)


****Collapsed disorder********  The structural properties of the molten globule (which was originally described as universal folding intermediate of globular proteins) are well known and
have been systematized in number of reviews. The protein molecule in this intermediate state has no (or has only a trace of) rigid cooperatively melted tertiary structure. However, it is characterized not only by the well-developed secondary structure, but also by the presence of some topology, i.e., relatively fixed mutual positioning of the secondary structure elements. A considerable increase in the accessibility of a protein molecule to proteases was noted as a specific property of the molten globule.
The transformation into this intermediate state is accompanied by a considerable increase in the affinity of a protein molecule to the hydrophobic fluorescence probes


****** Extended disorder***  A significant number of sequences encodes for the extendedly disordered proteins that are characterized by low sequence complexity. Are these proteins
random coils, or do they possess residual or transient structure? If they have residual or transient structure, how should they be classified? Based on the analysis of the available literature, it has been concluded that such proteins do not possess uniform structural properties, as expected for members of a single thermodynamic entity. In fact, they may be divided into two structurally different groups, intrinsic coils and intrinsic pre-molten globules

The unfolded protein is essentially never a true random coil. In fact, the existence of significant residual structure in the unfolded globular protein has been described even under the most
severe denaturing conditions, such as high concentrations of strong denaturants [144-147]. Thus, coil-like ID proteins are not completely random, but are characterized by the presence
of some residual (and highly flexible) structure. This fact is very important for the functioning of these proteins.
Protein random coils differ from true random coils in important respects, such as a non-random population of internal bond angles along the chain.

Coincidiendo con esta idea que la proteina no plegada nunca es una true random-coil, the persistence of native-like contacts in the denatured (disordered) state has been shown in NMR experiements and in high temperature molecular dynamics simulation. The existence of preferred limited proteolysis cutting sites also indicates that the native conformation prevails


These and many other studies made the term unstructured obsolete. The distinguishing and unifying feature of these proteins,if any, is their inability to fold into a unique and stable tertiary structure. They display a vast array of function-related structural organization, therefore, the field has settled on the term ‘disordered’. This term applies to both short and long regions that are part of a larger folded protein (loops and linkers) and proteins that entirely lack a folded structure. This latter category is sometimes also termed (natively) unfolded. Terms such as ‘pliable’, ‘malleable’, and others have also been suggested in the literature, but have not gained general recognition.


The conformational behavior of IDPs is typically characterized by a low cooperativity (or the
complete lack thereof) during denaturant-induced unfolding of any structure that might exist,
by the lack of measurable excess heat absorption peak(s) characteristic for the melting of
ordered proteins, by a gain of structure in response to heat and changes in pH, by the ability to
gain structure in the presence of various counter ions, osmolytes, membranes and binding
partners, and by different, protein-specific responses to macromolecular crowding

An increase in temperature often induces the partial folding of intrinsically unstructured
proteins (i.e., proteins with extended disorder), rather than the unfolding that is typically
observed for globular proteins. The effects of elevated temperature may be attributed to the
increased strength of the hydrophobic interaction at higher temperatures, leading to a stronger
hydrophobic driving force for partial folding

For a number of extendedly-disordered proteins it has been shown that a decrease (or increase)
in pH induces partial folding of intrinsically unordered proteins due to the minimization of
their large net charge present at neutral pH, thereby decreasing charge/charge intramolecular
repulsion and permitting hydrophobic-driven collapse to the partially-folded conformation

Importantly, this high temperature and extreme pH stability of ID proteins can be used isolate
them from cell extracts

Un aspecto importante que se evaluo sobre la conformacion es que esta ocurre tambien in-vivo. Cuando se comenzo a hablar de las proteinas desordenadas y se hicieron los primeros experimentos in vitro sobre las conformaciones adoptadas, se hipotetizo que quizas la desestructuracion era caused by isolation and high dilution of the protein in the test tube. If this were the case, crowding elicited by extreme macromolecular concentrations and/or folding induced by physiological binding partners would actually make them fold in vivo.
Se realizaron distintos experimentos para evaluar esto, tales como simular situaciones de aglomeracion in-vitro, mediante in-cell NMR, o midiendo in-vivo sensitivity of IDPs to ubiquitin-independent degradation. In all, the evidence seems overwhelming now that structural disorder also exists in vivo and it is truly the native, functional state of these proteins.







INDUCED FIT:

Protein folding and binding are analogous processes, in which the
protein ‘searches’ for favourable intramolecular or intermolecular
interactions on a funnelled energy landscape 1,2 . Many eukaryotic
proteins are disordered under physiological conditions, and fold
into ordered structures only on binding to their cellular targets

Many intrinsically disordered proteins undergo
transitions to more ordered states or fold into stable
secondary or tertiary structures on binding to their
targets — that is, they undergo coupled folding and
binding processes


IDPs cannot spontaneously fold into the compact globular structures. Some of them fold as a
whole while interacting with their partners, if the free energy of complex is
lower than the free energies of IDP and its partner before their interaction.
More
often, however, only a part of an IDP, a specific recognition element, which is a relatively
short amphipathic linear motif contained within long disordered sequence, is involved in the
coupled folding and binding events

Induced fit interactions can also occur between structural domains and relatively large natively unstructured regions of other proteins. 
The natively unstructured region is then induced to form a stable structure, but only in the presence of the interacting structural domain.


There are two major models describing
the coupled folding and binding process in proteins, the conformational selection model and
the simultaneous binding and folding model, also known as the induced folding model.

The conformational selection
mechanism is based on the hypothesis that when free in solution, IDP populates the
ensemble of conformations and, from this ensemble, the binding partner “chooses” or
“selects” a specific conformation which closely approximates that of the bound form. An
illustrative example of the conformational selection mechanism in the recognition process is
so-called “preformed structural elements” or elements of local residual structure, which are
frequently observed in IDPs and which are crucial for the IDP interactions with its specific
partners
Induced folding model postulates that IDP associates with
its binding partner in a fully disordered state and subsequently folds in association with the
target protein. In molecular recognition, this model is exemplified by so-called molecular
recognition elements or features, which are short (around 20 residues) structural elements
which are found within the regions of disorder and which mediates certain classes of binding
events of disordered regions undergoing a disorder-to-order transition into a specific
structure that is stabilized by binding to its partner. These recognition motifs can fold
into α-helix, β-strand, or form irregular structure on binding to a target protein

Obviously, in reality, either one of the outlined above
mechanisms, the conformational selection model or the induced folding model, or some
combination of the two can be used


**********ESTO ES MASOMENOS LO MISMO PERO DICHO DE OTRA FORMA
An important feature of the intrinsically unstructured proteins is that they are able to undergo a disorder-to-or-der transition (i. e. partial or complete folding) during or prior to their biological function. In other words, intrinsically unfolded proteins in vivo are likely to be stabilized by functional binding to specific targets and ligands (such as a variety of small molecules, substrates, cofactors, other proteins, nucleic acids, membranes and so on). The functional importance of being disordered has been intensively analyzed, and it has been established that increased intrinsic plasticity represents an important prerequisite for effective molecular recognition



There is, however, an alternative view to the problem of
existence and functionality of intrinsically unstructured
proteins. It is possible that these proteins are as folded in
the cell as ‘normal’ proteins, due to the fact that concen-
tration of their ligands is always high enough in vivo to
fold them. Thus, evolution never sees them as any differ-
ent from normal proteins.
In this view, the property of be-
ing intrinsically unstructured is merely an artifact result-
ing from the proteins being studied after being purified to
homogeneity. Evolutionarily, intrinsically unstructured
proteins persist not because there is an advantage to be-
ing intrinsically unstructured, but because there is no dis-
advantage as long as there are enough ligands around in
vivo to fold the proteins. The stability of the folded, lig-
and bound form may only be a few kcal/mol, but this
would be enough to keep the vast majority of molecules
folded and functional (even most normal, folded proteins
are only marginally stable









En base a todo esto que se dice de disorder e induced fit, en el paper (Intrinsically Disordered Protein A. Keith Dunker) se plantea una clasificacion en 2:

we suggest two categories of disorder: intermittent and constant.
The former describes protein molecular
recognition domains and other regions that undergo order/disorder transitions to
carry out binding or other functions. The latter describes regions such as
roteinaceous detergents, flexible linkers, entropic springs, entropic clocks and
entropic bristles that remain disordered while carrying out function.































*************************************************************************************************


FUNCIONES Y MECANISMOS FUNCIONALES:



MECANISMOS FUNCIONALES:
The intrinsic lack of structure and function-related disorder-to-order transitions provide
IDPs with various functional advantages, such as: (i) Decoupled specificity and strength of
binding provides for high-specificity-low-affinity interactions; (ii) Increased speed of
interaction due to greater capture radius and the ability to spatially search through
interaction space; (iii) Increased interaction (surface) area per residue; (iv) The ability for
one-to-many and many-to-one interactions; (v) Increased capture radius for a specific
binding site in comparison with that of ordered protein with its restricted conformational
freedom, (vi) Fast binding kinetics, etc


Intrinsic plasticity has been proposed to be advantageous because it could enable a single protein to recognize many biological targets while
still being specific [13– 15]. Moreover, it has been pointed out that the susceptibility to proteases and, hence,
shortened lifespan of disordered proteins is an added advantage because these proteins play roles in cell-cycle
regulation [13].
Ademas(o, en lugar) de estas propiedades adaptativas leading to advantages in regulation and in binding diverse ligands, las proteinas IDPs pueden conferir otra ventaja.
Disordered proteins often have
large intermolecular interfaces, the size of which is dic-
tated by protein function. For proteins to be stable as
monomers with extensive interfaces, protein size
would need to be 2–3 times larger. This would either
increase cellular crowding or enlarge the size of the cell
by 15 –30%, owing to the increase in the sequence
length. Smaller sizes of cells, proteins, DNA and RNA
conserve energy. Thus, disordered proteins provide a
simple yet elegant solution to having large intermolecu-
lar interfaces, but with smaller protein, genome and
cell sizes.
The natively disordered state is a simple
and elegant solution adopted by evolution to avoid large
protein, genome and cell sizes.

For many examples, the given disordered regions are not known to bind to any partner, but they still carry out
important functions such as providing flexible linkers be-
tween structured domains or providing flexible tails that
regulate the structured domains

Even if the lifetime of the preferred native
conformation is short(como es el caso de las disordered conformations), this conformation still exists. The
binding and shift in the equilibrium takes care of
the function.
A large interface with a
particular structure and pattern of residues is required for
protein function; as to the rest, function is not affected.
Even if the protein is natively disordered in the ensemble,
the relative population of the native conformation is still
large. Conformational shift and re-distribution will attend
to the function.


As a result of breathtaking advances in comparative evolutionary and experimental structure–function studies, it is now clear that structural disorder provides multiple functional advantages, and IDP functions either directly stem from their disorder (entropic chains) or from molecular recognition, when they undergo induced folding (disorder-to-order transition) upon binding to a partner molecule. Several of their specific functional modalities, such as adaptability in binding, high functional density, weak but specific binding, and frequent regulation by post-translational modification, have been formally demonstrated. The induced folding concept stimulated much research and led to a virtual explosion in the field of short motifs.

Non-globular sequence segments often contain short linear peptide motifs (e.g. SH3-binding sites) which are important for protein function.
***********ACA HAY UN POSIBLE ENGANCHE CON EL TEMA DE ELM *********
It was
previously known that many types of protein–protein
interactions and enzymatic modifications are mediated
by short sequence elements (consensus sites), which gave
way to the much broader concept of short linear motifs
(SLiMs) or eukaryotic linear motifs (ELMs). It was formally shown
that most motifs are found in intrinsically disordered
regions (IDRs)

On a more structural basis, the related
concepts of preformed structural elements (PSEs [41]) and
molecular recognition features (MoRFs [42]) are suggested
to be short disordered regions that sample structured
states within the conformational ensemble, and become
fully ordered upon binding to the partner.
Binding by
motifs is usually weak, transient, and possibly of limited
specificity [39], which can be made stronger and/or more
specific by either cooperating with flanking regions, com-
bining several motifs, or utilizing longer disordered
domains (VER ref:Close encounters of the third kind: disordered
domains and the interactions of proteins,
 en este paper se habla de 'disordered domains' como un tipo distinto a los short recognition motifs)
************DICHO DE OTRA FORMA
Binding of IDPs to their partners via linear motifs is often
weak and is of limited specificity [11]. When stronger,
more specific binding is required, IDPs use two distinct
strategies. For one, they may use disordered domains for
recognition [23], which are longer than 20 residues and
conform to all three domain definitions, that is they are
autonomous structural, functional, and evolutionary units.
These long disordered regions (Figure 2) should be
recognized as novel structural–functional elements of
IDPs [23]. The other strategy is the combined action
of several motifs,






****ACA NO SE POR QUE ASUME COMO QUE LAS IDP SIEMPRE SE PLIEGAN PARA EL BINDING(ANTES O DESPUES DE LA UNION)*****
An often-raised issue with respect to IDP binding is
whether folding occurs before or after binding (termed
conformational selection and induced folding, respective-
ly). Detailed
studies suggest that folding can occur both before and
after binding in distinct cases




Two unexpected and important concepts have also
emerged in the binding-folding paradigm. One is the
intriguing observation that two IDPs/IDRs can bind each
other in a process of mutual (synergistic) folding [47].
The other, even more confounding finding, is that recog-
nition can proceed even in the lack of folding in the bound
state. The many examples of such ‘fuzzy’ interactions demand the extension of the concept of structural disorder to the bound state.


Irrespective of the actual mechanism of binding, an IDP/
IDR might have a greater capture radius than a globular
protein and it can bind at a relatively larger distance
followed by reeling on to the partner, potentially enhancing
the rate of binding by a ‘fly-casting’ mechanism, according to which the unfolded polypeptide first binds weakly at a relatively large
distance from the actual binding site and then folds as the protein approaches the binding
site.

A related phenomenon
might operate in the spatial search by transcription factors
in sequence-specific DNA recognition, termed the ‘monkey-
bar’ binding mechanism





IDPs EN FUNCIONES DE INTERACCION
When IUPs/IDRs are involved in PPIs,
they undergo induced folding or disorder-to-order
transition, 18,19 suggested to provide several advan-
tages, such as specificity without excessive binding
strength, increased speed of interaction, binding
promiscuity or moonlighting, among others. 14,20,21
These advantages underscore the high frequency of
disorder in proteins organizing the interactome, i.e.
in hubs. 22–25 In terms of the molecular details of the
recognition process, it has been suggested that IUPs
often use short sequential recognition elements for
binding, termed primary contact sites, 26 preformed
structural elements, 27 or molecular recognition
elements/features (MorEs/MorFs). 28,29 In direct
connection with these concepts, a recent analysis
has shown that short linear motifs in proteins often
fall into locally disordered regions, 30 underlying
the suggestion that interactions of IUPs/IDRs 
We found that the chemical and physical
features of interfaces of IUPs are distinct from those
of globular proteins in many aspects, such as a much
larger relative area, and preference for hydrophobic
residues, which exceeds even the interior of the
protein. Their much larger contact number per
residue are indicative of structural adaptation
driven by induced folding, and suggest that IUPs
might preferentially gain stabilization energy from
contacts with the partner.
The detailed analysis of the amino acid composi-
tion of the interfaces provides full evidence for this
point, i.e. that IUPs preserve and expose their
hydrophobic residues for partner binding. In agree-
ment with previous studies, 5,32 the analysis of
ordered proteins shows that their surface is enriched
in polar/charged residues, and depleted in hydro-
phobic residues
The characteristic differences found between the two types of complexes
suggest that IUPs represent a distinct molecular implementation of the
principles of protein–protein recognition. The interfaces do not differ in size,
but those of IUPs cover a much larger part of the surface of the protein than
for their ordered counterparts. Moreover, IUP interfaces are significantly
more hydrophobic relative to their overall amino acid composition, but also
in absolute terms. They rely more on hydrophobic–hydrophobic than on
polar–polar interactions. Their amino acids in the interface realize more
intermolecular contacts, which suggests a better fit with the partner due to
induced folding upon binding that results in a better adaptation to the
partner. The two modes of interaction also differ in that IUPs usually use
only a single continuous segment for partner binding, whereas the binding
sites of ordered proteins are more segmented. Probably, all these features
contribute to the increased evolutionary conservation of IUP interface
residues. These noted molecular differences are also manifested in the
interaction energies of IUPs.




FUNCIONALIDADES:

El estudio de estas proteinas llevo a encontrar una gran cantidad de funcionalidades asociadas.The physical characteristics of IDPs allow an exquisite level of control of cellular signalling processes. Their favourable characteristics include: the presence of small recognition elements that fold on partner binding; a degree of flexibility, which enables them to interact promiscuously with different targets on different occasions; accessible sites for post-translational modificatio­n; e­fficient utilization of conserved sequence motifs to mediate binding interactions; the ability to bind partners with high specificity but modest affinity, leading to rapid and spontaneous dissociation and termination of the signal 1,3,19 ; kinetic advantages in signalling 20 , as their extremely fast association rates allow signals to be rapidly turned on.


TIGHT REGULATION:
Esta alta promiscuidad quizas sea la explicacion de por que este tipo de proteinas esta altamente regulado at the transcriptional, RNA and protein levels
Perhaps offering a further rationale for such tight
regulation, structural disorder is also heavily involved
in the formation of insoluble and intractable aggregates,
known as amyloids (esto creo que esta refutado en la parte de amyloids)

The
most likely explanation is that proteolytic degra-
dation is tightly regulated in eukaryotic cells, being
carried out by the proteasomes in response to ubi-
quitination or other such signals
Clearly, unfolded proteins can be functional
under such circumstances, although one may sus-
pect that the lifetime of such molecules might well
be shorter than for other cellular components that
are well-folded at all times. This reduced lifetime
may also constitute a component of the regulation
of these proteins, a possibility made more plausible
by the vital roles many of them play in cell cycle
regulation and in transcriptional and translational
processes. Conceivably, the sensitivity and short
response time implicit in many of these processes
could be mediated by a system where the regulat-
ory molecules are targeted for rapid turnover.

Certain biological functions, such as enzyme cat-
alysis, immunological recognition, or molecular
discrimination by receptors, absolutely demand
exquisite control of three-dimensional structure. In
contrast, functions such as signaling can be
achieved by linear sequences, simple sequence pat-
terns, or by isolated secondary structural motifs.

Las funciones desarrolladas por las IDPs son generalmente aquellas que mas se benefician de la falta de una estructura estable. As a result, IDPs are generally thought to be
involved in processes of signaling and regulation. Most of the functions that correlate with the presence of long disordered regions are related to regulation via transcription and translation, whereas functions that correlate with the lack of disorder are dominated by enzymatic catalysis.

the transcriptional rates of
mRNAs encoding IDPs and ordered proteins were comparable. However the IDP-encoding
transcripts were generally less abundant than transcripts encoding ordered proteins due to
the increased decay rates of the formers.

The existence of tight regulation of the IDP abundance was also established at the protein
level. In fact, IDPs were shown to be less abundant than ordered proteins due to the lower
rate of protein synthesis and shorter protein half-lives.
IDPs were shown to be substrates of twice as
many kinases as were ordered proteins. Furthermore, the vast majority of kinases whose
substrates were IDPs were either regulated in a cell-cycle dependent manner, or activated
upon exposure to particular stimuli or stress (Gsponer et al., 2008). Therefore, post-
translational modifications may not only serve as important mechanism for the fine-tuning
of the IDP functions but possibly they are necessary to tune the IDP availability under the
different cellular conditions.





RELACION CON EL SPLICING ALTERNATIVO: 
In several recent works it has been shown that the functional and evolution-
ary agility of IDPs can be ascribed to the inclusion or
exclusion of such motifs in RNA maturation; that is, by
alternative splicing, alternative promoter usage, and RNA
editing, the alternative isoforms thus generated promote
the functional diversification of the proteome  (ref. Linear motifs: lost in (pre)translation). This
mechanism can result in a change in diverse functional
attributes, such as subcellular localization, protein–pro-
tein interaction, phase transitions and even opposing
(dominant negative) function, as also demonstrated by
studying tissue-specific forms of alternative splicing. These
protein isoforms tend to occupy central positions in inter-
action networks and their pattern of interaction partners
tend to significantly differ [63]; that is, structural disorder
and encoded motifs have a strong potential to define and
redefine wiring of cellular signaling pathways.







'COSTO BIOLOGICO' DE LAS IDPs (y relacion con las enfermedades):

One observation pertains to chromosomal translocations,
which fuse segments of distinct genes and generate
oncogenic protein chimeras in cancer. In a comprehen-
sive bioinformatic analysis of 406 translocation-related
human proteins, such as BCR-ABL and CBP-MLL [47],
these proteins, and their translocation breakpoints in
particular, were shown to be significantly enriched in
disorder. Apparently, structural disorder enables these
chimeras to evade cellular surveillance mechanisms and
exert their deleterious functions.

Translocations in disordered regions leave the
folded domains intact and thereby lead to a fusion pro-
tein with aberrant functions. By contrast, truncations
or translocations in the regions of a gene that encode
fully structured domains would almost certainly lead
to the production of a misfolded protein, which would
be rapidly degraded by the cellular machinery and
would therefore not produce a disease phenotype.

Disordered regions can also have a biological cost in
terms of the promotion and proliferation of protein-
folding diseases.



Another recent paper addressed the related phenomenon of dosage sensitivity,
 that is asked what renders gene products harmful when they are overexpressed. It was found that predicted
intrinsic protein disorder is the strongest determinant of this effect, suggesting that the likely cause of
dosage sensitivity is binding promiscuity of IDPs.


A corollary of the foregoing observations is that structural
disorder seems to enable the rapid appearance of novel,
‘less-evolved’ proteins that have not undergone a long
evolutionary selection.



**************************************************************



METODOS EXPERIMENTALES QUE SE USARON INICIALMENTE PARA IDENTIFICAR PROTEINAS/REGIONES DESORDENADAS:

The key experimental method for obtaining systematic
site-specific information on unstructured proteins is
NMR spectroscopy.
Other techniques, including CIRCULAR DICHROISM (CD),
hydrodynamic measurements, FLUORESCENCE SPECTROSCOPY ,
VIBRATIONAL CD SPECTROSCOPY and RAMAN SPECTROSCOPY , as well
as traditional biochemical studies of proteolytic suscep-
tibility, can give important information

	-X-ray crystallography: Disorder leads to missing electron density in protein structures determined by X-ray crystallography. Two
types of disorder have been recognized, static and dynamic. 30,72

	-NMR spectroscopy: 3D structures can be determined for proteins in
solution by NMR. The absence of the requirement for crystallization means that
NMR provides a less biased estimate of the commonness of disorder as compared
to crystallography. 
For several examples, comparison of the results of the X-ray and NMR analyses of the same
protein has revealed that solution and crystal structures can be quite different, with solution
structures being much more flexible [24,25]. Evidently the interactions in the crystal lattice
reduce protein flexibility and, in some cases, have even been observed to induce disorder to
order transitions in functionally important protein regions. Thus, NMR spectroscopy is able to
directly confirm the flexibility of protein segments that are missing in crystallographic
experiments and can sometimes indicate flexible regions that have become rigid due to crystal
contacts.
One way to characterize the dynamic struc-
ture of IUPs is by measuring their backbone flexibility
using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation
experiments
NMR relaxation measurements can be
used to assess the residue specific molecular motions of
IUPs on timescales ranging from picoseconds to millisec-
onds, covering the range of most biologically relevant
protein motions. A particularly powerful and rapid way to
assess backbone flexibility is by analyzing the NMR
relaxation data using reduced spectral density mapping
(Farrow et al. 1997; Lefevre et al. 1996). This approach
provides an estimate of backbone flexibility for each amino
acid residue and it can be used to determine whether the
backbone flexibility in a family of IUPs is conserved.
	-Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy: Structural information for proteins
in solution is also provided by circular dichroism. 81 Far UV CD spectra provide
estimates of secondary structure and so distinguish ordered and molten globular
forms from random coil.
	
	-Protease digestion: Since a structured region has to become unfolded over more than 10
residues to be cut by typical proteases, 87 the ratio of the digestion rates,
(disordered) / (ordered), should be about equal to e -∆G/RT , where ∆G is the free
energy of unfolding the segment. Protease digestion is especially useful when used in combination with
other methods.
For example, protease digestion can be used with X-ray
diffraction to help sort out whether a region of missing electron density is due to a
wobbly domain or to intrinsic disorder.

	-Stoke’s radius determination: Random-coil disorder has also been
detected by various methods for obtaining Stoke’s radius such as small angle X-
ray scattering or size exclusion chromatography. 93 Abnormally large radii for a
given molecular weight provide evidence of disorder.





METODOS COMPUTACIONALES PARA PREDECIR DESORDEN:
REFERENCIAS: 
	Predicting intrinsic disorder in proteins: an overview  (REVIEW COMPLETO)
	PONDR-FIT: a meta-predictor of intrinsically disordered amino acids 


Accurate IDP prediction is a necessary prerequisite for
the complete understanding of the principles of protein
folding. IDP prediction is also needed for comprehension
of the molecular mechanisms of protein function and
for building a new structural and functional hierarchy
of proteins.


A signature
of probable intrinsic disorder is the presence of low
sequence complexity and amino-acid compositional
bias, with a low content of bulky hydrophobic aminoacids (Val, Leu, Ile, Met, Phe, Trp and Tyr), which would
normally form the core of a folded globular protein, and
a high proportion of particular polar and charged amino


PONDR: In 1997, the first Predictor Of Natural Disordered Regions (PONDR) was developed.
acids (Gln, Ser, Pro, Glu, Lys and, on occasion, Gly and
Ala) .


A number of computer programs are now available
for the prediction of unstructured regions from amino-
acid sequences. These include PONDR 14 , FoldIndex 15 ,
DisEMBL 16 , GLOBPLOT 2 (REF. 17) and DISOPRED2


Disprot: Intriguingly, thousands of the structures in PDB are now known to contain disordered chains that become structured only in the presence of the partner, and there are also many regions that are actually missing from electron density maps [11]. Such evidence added to that obtained by other techniques [mostly NMR and circular dichroism (CD)], which enabled the creation of DisProt, a database dedicated to structural disorder (Ref: DisProt: the Database of Disordered Proteins. Nucleic Acids Res).


GlobPlot (ref: GlobPlot: exploring protein sequences for globularity and disorder)
	

Whereas the latest release
(2010 November) of the DisProt database [7] contains
1342 disordered regions in 627 IDPs (www.disprot.org),
there is still a very wide gap between experimentally
demonstrated and expected structural disorder, which
leaves much room for bioinformatics in large-scale func-
tional association studies. Based on the compositional bias
of IDPs, several dozen predictors of different principles
have been developed [8]. To handle limitations inherent
in prediction accuracy due to distinct flavors of disorder,
however, different predictors are recently combined into
metapredictors, such as metaPrDOS [9] or PONDR-FIT
[10]. These combined predictors do show improved per-
formance over their composite ones.




En el review (\ref Predicting intrinsic disorder in proteins: an overview ) se analizan distintos metodos computacionales que habia disponibles en esa fecha(2009)	
Los predictores que se analizan son:
PONDR[36-41], FoldIndex [42], GlobPlot [43], Dis-
EMBL [44], DISOPRED and DISOPRED2 [45-48],
DRIPPRED [49], IUPred [50, 51], FoldUnfold [52-54],
RONN [55], DISpro [56], DisPSSMP and DisPSSMP2
[57, 58], Spritz [59] and PrDOS [60], etc.



En orden historico:


1) Primeros predictores: The first period (1) First informal IDP predictor The
first period is the beginning of the prediction for IDPs
and includes the predictors designed before 2002. In
1979, much earlier than the publication of the PONDR ® s,
Williams [34] made the first attempt to predict lack of
structure based on amino acid sequence. He suggested
that the ratio given by (number of charged amino acids)/
(number of hydrophobic amino acids) would distinguish
non-folding proteins from structured examples. This
suggestion was based on very good results for a small
number of examples.


2) Development of the PONDR ® family: The first formal predictor was published by Romero et al. [36]
in 1997, which could predict disordered structure in
proteins based on the specific biases of their amino acid
sequences.These predictors were subsequently called
Predictors of Natural Disordered Regions (PONDR ® )
followed by letters that describe the proteins in the train-
ing set for that particular predictor.
Basically, the PONDR ® algorithms work because the
amino acid compositions in a window of N amino ac-
ids for structured proteins are distinguishable from the
compositions for disordered proteins. A typical PONDR ®
uses the following types of inputs: (1) amino acid com-
positions; (2) attributes derived from compositions such
as sequence complexity; and (3) attributes derived from
compositions via some function or scale such as hydrop-
athy, net charge, etc. These various types of attributes
are then weighted and combined in a non-linear manner,
typically via artificial neural networks (ANNs). Other
methods of combining the attributes such as support vec-
tor machines (SVMs) and logistic regression give results
very similar to those obtained with ANNs.




3) CH-plot In 2000 Uversky et al. used charge and
hydropathy to predict disorder, but in an entirely new
way compared to approach used by Williams much
earlier as described above. The Uversky et al. [35] ap-
proach is based on the simple reasoning that the folding
of a protein is governed by a balance between attractive
forces (e.g., hydrophobic interactions) and repulsive
forces (Coulomb or electrostatic repulsion). Rather than
the total charge used in the Williams ratio, net charge
is more appropriate for estimating repulsion. High net
charge leads to strong electrostatic repulsion and low
hydropathy minimally means less driving force for com-
paction. Thus, whether a query sequence is disordered
or not can be predicted based on the ratio of its mean net
charge with mean hydropathy. The mean hydropathy is
defined as the sum of the hydropathies of all residues di-
vided by the number of residues in the polypeptide. The
mean net charge is similarly defined as the net charge, at
pH 7.0, divided by the total number of residues. A plot of
mean net charge versus mean hydropathy (the CH-plot)
separates structured and disordered proteins into distinct
regions and thereby provides a binary predictor


4) GlobPlot: The kernel idea of GlobPlot is the relative propensity
of an amino acid residue to be in an ordered or disor-
dered state [43]. GlobPlot uses an amino acid scale based
on the difference in the probability for a given amino
acid to be in random coil or to be in regular secondary
structure. The basic algorithm behind GlobPlot is simple
and very fast, representing a sum function.

5)DisEMBL designed by Linding et al. [43] consists
of three separate ANN predictors, to predict three kinds
of disordered structures in proteins, which represent
residues within “loops/coils (as defined by DSSP38)”,
“hot loops (loops with high B-factors)”, or those that are
missing from the PDB X-ray structures (called “Remark
465”


6)DISOPRED employs a feed-forward neural network
to predict disordered regions [45]. It needs to use a rela-
tively large number of hidden units to enhance the map-
ping ability, and this may cause over-fitting and slow the
training down. So, they designed DISOPRED2 based on
SVMs instead of ANN


7) IUPred: Dosztanyi et al. suggested that a large number of inter-
residue interactions is responsible for structure stabiliza-
tion of proteins [50, 51]. In contrast, IDPs don’t have
sufficient numbers of stabilizing inter-residue interac-
tions. Based on this reasoning, an IUPred algorithm esti-
mating the inter-residue interactions was designed. First,
the interaction energy between each pair of amino acids
based on their C β positions was estimated. This was done
by calculating the potential mutual contact energies for
all amino acid pairs in a dataset of globular proteins with
known structure. This is a fairly standard approach in
computational biology, and in this work Dosztanyi et al.
compared several such mutual contact energies estimated
previously by other researchers, with the set developed
by Thomas and Dill, found to be the best in this particu-
lar application [92]. The various pairwise energies were
assembled into a 20 × 20 energy matrix, which was used
in the next step, the estimation of the mutual interaction
energies for any given protein. The prediction utilizes
this energy prediction matrix and the amino acid compo-
sitions put into a quadratic expression. These statistical
values represent the ability to form stabilization contacts
between amino acids in polypeptide chains. The poten-
tial mutual interactions were estimated using amino acid
compositions, not three-dimensional structures. These
composition-based energies were compared with three-
dimensional structure-based energies of the proteins for
which the actual side chain interactions are known. The
composition-based potential mutual interaction energies
and the structure-based energies were found to be highly
correlated, thus the former can be used to estimate the
latter even when the structures are not known. To use
this approach to predict structure or disorder, compo-
sition-based calculations for a set of proteins that fold
into three-dimensional structures were compared with
composition-based calculations for a set of disordered
proteins. The estimated potential interaction energies for
the structured proteins were much greater than the same
energies for the unstructured proteins, and from these
results the energy boundary between ordered and disor-
dered proteins as a function of length was determined.
This boundary allows the recognition of intrinsic disor-
der. In brief, if a sequence contains too few hydrophobic
residues, then the composition-based potential mutual in-
teraction energy will necessarily be too small and thereby
indicate the lack of potential for folding




LIMITACIONES EN LOS PREDICTORES:

Although the IDP-related research is con-
tinuing to be of significant interest, and, although gratify-
ing achievements occurred, this field is still experiencing
many difficulties.
First, the number of proteins with experimentally de-
termined disordered structure is still small.

Second, because the molecular mechanisms of dis-
ordered structure formation are not very clear yet, the
selected characteristics and attributes in the prediction
process are mainly focused on the biochemical proper-
ties of amino acids and on the compositional content of
sequences.

Third, IDPs can be characterized by more than 20
biophysical methods, each of which gives slightly differ-
ent information. Thus, if time and money were no issue,
there would be a significant advantage to characterize
a significant number of disordered regions by multiple
methods [110, 118]. A collection of IDPs characterized
by multiple methods would provide an important basis
set for developing a deeper understanding of different
types of disorder.

Fourth, a consensus has not yet been reached among
different researchers regarding even the definition of
IDPs. Typically researchers involved in the IDP studies
have put forward different IDP definitions based on dif-
ferent aspects of the protein structural ensembles, and
several researchers have pointed out the importance of
characterizing individual IDPs by a variety of compu-
tational methods


En general, the current limitation to further improve-
ment in prediction accuracies comes from noise in the
structured and disordered protein data. Unstructured
proteins can form complexes that become structured
[86], and unless care is taken when selecting structured
proteins from the Protein Data Bank, structured proteins
arising from disorder would contribute noise to the train-
ing set for structured protein. Likewise, regions that are
characterized as disordered experimentally can undergo
coupled binding and folding.











**********************************************************************************
	




METODOS COMPUTACIONALES PARA PREDECIR FUNCIONALIDAD EN REGIONES DESORDENADAS:

Predicting function and/or functional sites of IDPs is a
task even more difficult(que predecir la conformacion desordenada). 
Recently, significant advance has
been made in this direction, based on the observation that
interactions of IDPs are often mediated by short linear
motifs [11]. Because linear motifs are 3–15 residues in
length, they contain very little sequence information and
their prediction from sequence alone is fraught with very
high false positive rates. A critical advance in this direc-
tion has been made by applying context-filters, which
significantly increase prediction accuracy by taking into
consideration motif enrichment in proteins that share the
same binding partner or evolutionary history (e.g. SLiM-
Finder [12]). Completely different logic forms the basis of
ANCHOR, which predicts disordered binding sites by
estimating their interaction energy with a general partner
[13], and of the molecular recognition feature predictor
(a-MoRF-PredII
